doc/why_graphql.asciidoc, before:

[[why_graphql]]

== Why GraphQL

A worthy question to ask is "`Why GraphQL?`"

In many ways, GraphQL is a natural extension of what we are already
doing on the Web. As our systems grow, we start realizing our systems
become gradually more heterogenous in the sense that data becomes more
complex and data gets more variance.

In addition--since we usually have a single API serving multiple
different clients, written in different languages for different
platforms--we need to be flexible in query support. Clients are likely
to evolve dynamically, non-linearly, and at different paces. Thus, the
backend must support evolution while retaining backwards
compatibility. Also, we must have a contract or protocol between the
clients and the server that is standardized. Otherwise, we end up
inventing our own system again and again, and this is a strenous
affair which has little to no reuse between systems.

The defining characteristic of GraphQL is that the system is
client-focused and client-centric. Data is driven by the client of the
system, and not by the server. The consequence is that the
delivery-time for features tend to be shorter. As soon as the product
knows what change to make, it can often be handled with less
server-side interaction than normally. Especially for the case where
you are recombining existing data into a new view.

RESTful APIs have served us well for a long time. And they are likely
to continue serving as well in a large number of situations. However,
if you have a system requiring more complex interaction, chances are
you are better off by taking the plunge and switching your system to
GraphQL.

.Efficency

RESTful APIs recently got a powerful improvement in HTTP/2 which
allows RESTful APIs to pipeline far better than what they did earlier.
However, you still pay the round trip time between data dependencies
in an HTTP/2 setting: You need the listing of keys before you can
start requesting the data objects on those keys. In contrast, GraphQL
queries tend to be a single roundtrip only. A full declarative query
is formulated and executed, without the need of any intermediate
query. This means faster response times. Even in the case where a
single query becomes slower since there is no need for followup
queries.

.Porting

You can often move your system onto GraphQL a bit at a time. You don't
have to port every endpoint in the beginning. Often, people add some
kind of field, `previousId` say, which is used as an identifier in the
old system. Then you can gradually take over data from an old system
and port it on top of GraphQL. Once the ball is rolling, it is likely
that more and more clients want to use it, as it is a easier interface
for them to use.

Commit message:

Large set of additions:
* Object resolution is now documented
* Start working on population of the database
* Add data fixtures from SWAPI
* Lots of small improvements to the styling
* Far more documentation written

doc/why_graphql.asciidoc, after:

[[why_graphql]]

== Why GraphQL

A worthy question to ask is "`Why GraphQL?`"

In many ways, GraphQL is a natural extension of what we are already
doing on the Web. As our systems grow, we start realizing our systems
become gradually more heterogenous in the sense that data becomes more
complex and data gets more variance.

In addition--since we usually have a single API serving multiple
different clients, written in different languages for different
platforms--we need to be flexible in query support. Clients are likely
to evolve dynamically, non-linearly, and at different paces. Thus, the
backend must support evolution while retaining backwards
compatibility. Also, we must have a contract or protocol between the
clients and the server that is standardized. Otherwise, we end up
inventing our own system again and again, and this is a strenous
affair which has little to no reuse between systems.

The defining characteristic of GraphQL is that the system is
client-focused and client-centric. Data is driven by the client of the
system, and not by the server. The consequence is that the
delivery-time for features tend to be shorter. As soon as the product
knows what change to make, it can often be handled with less
server-side interaction than normally. Especially for the case where
you are recombining existing data into a new view.

RESTful APIs have served us well for a long time. And they are likely
to continue serving as well in a large number of situations. However,
if you have a system requiring more complex interaction, chances are
you are better off by taking the plunge and switching your system to
GraphQL.

.Efficency

RESTful APIs recently got a powerful improvement in HTTP/2 which
allows RESTful APIs to pipeline far better than what they did earlier.
However, you still pay the round trip time between data dependencies
in an HTTP/2 setting: You need the listing of keys before you can
start requesting the data objects on those keys. In contrast, GraphQL
queries tend to be a single roundtrip only. A full declarative query
is formulated and executed, without the need of any intermediate
query. This means faster response times. Even in the case where a
single query becomes slower since there is no need for followup
queries.

A major (subtle) insight is that in a GraphQL server, you don't have
to hand-code the looping constructs which tend to be present in a lot
of RESTful APIs. To avoid the roundtrip describes in the preceeding
paragraph, you often resolve to a solution where a specialized
optimized query is constructed and added to the system. This
specialized endpoint is then looping over the data in one go so you
avoid having to do multiple roundtrips.

In a GraphQL system, that looping is handled once-and-for-all by the
GraphQL engine. You are only implementing callbacks that run as part
of the loop. A lot of tedious code is then handled by GraphQL and we
avoid having to code this again and again for each RESTful web service
we write.

.Porting

You can often move your system onto GraphQL a bit at a time. You don't
have to port every endpoint in the beginning. Often, people add some
kind of field, `previousId` say, which is used as an identifier in the
old system. Then you can gradually take over data from an old system
and port it on top of GraphQL. Once the ball is rolling, it is likely
that more and more clients want to use it, as it is a easier interface
for them to use.
